Five years ago, on the palindromic date of 02/02/2020, I released [*Subcutanean*](https://subcutanean.textories.com/), a procedural horror novel where no two copies were the same. (In what now seems a distant past, the generation for the project was entirely hand-crafted, with no LLMs or AIs involved.) One of the exclusive perks for the crowdfunding project was a glass USB key which contained 10,000 unique permutations of the novel and a handful of early drafts, behind-the-scenes material, the complete origin text from which all copies were generated, and the generator source code. I promised at the time that this material would be publicly released five years after publication. It's been five years, so: here it is! (The source code part at least... the other materials are available in [a separate archive](https://subcutanean.textories.com/SubcutaneanArchive.zip).

(If you're curious about the motivations and design of Subcutanean, there's [a series of design blogs](https://medium.com/@aareed/subcutanean-design-posts-e25d9c158cce) I wrote near the time of release. A [reading and design talk](https://stars.library.ucf.edu/elo2020/live/plenaries/4/#.XxG89sCQ6Yk.twitter) is also available.)

Part of the release is 10,000 new permutations of the novel. Why not release the original 10,000? Well, they were first generated in advance of the book's actual release, since I had to get them on the USB keys being sent to backers; so they're missing several rounds of updates to the generator code and improvements to the writing that happened in the immediate aftermath of release (and to a lesser extent, in the years since). In particular, there was a fairly major bug in the original version of the generator which could cause the same description of a character's dream to appear in two separate places; and a few other lesser bugs that could make descriptions of scenes or action to be inconsistent in a way that wasn't my intent.

Each major change to Subcutanean has been marked by incrementing the "generation" of random seeds used to create books, corresponding to the first digit of the seed number fed into the generator. These new copies are Generation 5, starting with seed #50000 and running up to seed #59999 inclusive. These are not available as part of this Github repo, but can be found at [a separate download](https://subcutanean.textories.com/SubcutaneanArchive.zip). 

(Which seed should you read? I've picked out three seeds somewhat at random that include a wide range of some of the major possible divergences: [#52447](https://subcutanean.textories.com/52447.html), [#56019](https://subcutanean.textories.com/56019.html), and [#58238](https://subcutanean.textories.com/58238.html). These should in no way be considered canonical versions: every *Subcutanean* is equally canonical.)

You can, as before, continue to [buy your own unique and freshly generated copies of the novel](https://subcutanean.textories.com/) directly from me, in digital or paperback format. These are seeds that have never been used before to generate a *Subcutanean* and will never be used again: each one is unique to you. 

The source code, source text and all prior, current, and future renderings of Subcutanean generated from it have now been released under a CC-BY-4.0 license, meaning you are free to share, archive, copy, and redistribute the material, even commercially, as long as credit is given to the original author (me, Aaron A. Reed). This means nothing is stopping anyone from selling their own versions or variants. My versions will always be the ones found at the book's official website, [subcutanean.textories.com](https://subcutanean.textories.com/).

Please note that the generator code included in this repo has not been cleaned up, modernized, or especially retooled to support use for other projects (although I did try to write it at the time to be at least somewhat reusable). It's written in Python 2 and while I hoped to keep it abstracted from *Subcutanean* specifics at the time of writing, I think a few project-specific details did creep in as it neared completion. It's presented mainly for historical curiosity than with the idea of easily adapting it to a new project, but you're of course welcome to try. (However, I do not plan to maintain this archive, accept pull requests etc.-- you're welcome to fork the codebase if you want to try updating or repurposing it.)

I hope this archive proves interesting to peruse as a documentation of this curious little project.

--Aaron A. Reed, February 2025
